#Abstract:
The role of lynx dispersal in maintaining their populations at the landscape scale is unclear. A large proportion of local lynx populations are known to disperse following a snowshoe hare population crash, but whether these dispersal events contribute to the cyclic dynamics of neighboring populations is not well understood. If lynx dispersal does play an important role in lynx population dynamics then the conservation of dispersal corridors is critical to maintaining those dynamics. However, we currently have no information on the habitat requirements of dispersing lynx in relation to human land use, such as housing developments, road building, timber harvest, and mining, all of which could have a substantial impact on the ability of lynx to successfully disperse. Lynx are highly sought after by trappers and are an important subsistence resource to local residents on refuges; however there is little understanding of the relationship between trapping and lynx population dynamics. Recent changes to trapping regulations have the potential to result in increased trapping pressure on lynx in Alaska. Evidence suggests trapping harvest can result in significant reduction of local populations, which has been documented in Alaska and Canada. In addition to impacts of trapping on local lynx populations, little is known about how trapping may influence dispersal processes. We seek a better understanding of lynx spatial ecology to ensure long-term population viability and continued trapping, hunting, and wildlife viewing opportunities.

#Short Abstract (300 char)
The role of lynx dispersal in maintaining their populations at the landscape scale is unclear. A large proportion of local lynx populations are known to disperse following a snowshoe hare population crash, but whether these dispersal events contribute to the cyclic dynamics of neighboring population

#Objectives:
The primary objective of this project is to determine changes in movements by lynx during the course of a snowshoe hare population cycle. It has been postulated that, at large spatial scales, lynx move long distances in response to a wave-like decline in hare abundance across the boreal forests of North America; lynx that locate sufficient prey resources survive and reproduce at a higher rate than lynx that move to or remain in areas of low prey abundance. For example, as hare abundance in western Canada begins to decline, some lynx residing in that region are likely to move into and across Alaska as they follow a traveling peak of hare abundance to the northern and western extents of their range. By deploying GPS collars on lynx distributed throughout interior Alaska and western Canada, we hope to collect location data and document some of these long-range movements made by lynx in response to fluctuating hare abundance. Large-scale movements by lynx might also be detected through differences in isotopic signatures in parts of the animal and the surrounding landscape. We will be using strontium isotopes in teeth from lynx skulls, provided by fur trappers from around the state, to determine the likelihood that lynx emigrated from different regions of Alaska or Canada. The secondary objective of the project is to learn about the habitat use, diet, reproduction, predation rates, and general movement patterns of lynx on Tetlin NWR by documenting their locations on a shorter timescale. We are using 4-hr GPS fix intervals and satellite data transmissions to estimate diel movement rates and behavior patterns, home ranges, and to track individuals on foot in order to measure rates of predation and identify prey items. Satellite data transmissions also notify us of mortality events, enabling rapid recovery of carcasses and identification of the causes of mortality. We also plan to use genetic and isotopic analyses of biological samples (e.g. hair, whiskers, blood, and feces) taken from captured and deceased lynx to assist us in determining the movements and relationships between lynx populations at local and regional scales.

#Keywords:
alaska, biota, boreal forest, boreallynx, canada lynx, dispersal, ecological dynamics, Lepus americanus, Lynx canadensis, movement, snowshoe hare, survival, telemetry, trapping
